Lionel work ex 4 (#22)
mitre/fhir-exercises: Exercise_4/docs/part-2.md

# Part 2: USCDI and Associated Terminology

## Background on Health Data Interoperability  
**Major health care reform changes in the past 30 years alongside technological advancements have driven the need for health data standards. The shift to value-based care (and reimbursement structures) fundamentally changed the way information needed to be exchanged between systems.**

> **Healthcare data interoperability** is the vision that an individual patient (or their dependents) could access their own medical records, or that those records did not have to be siloed in a particular provider’s ecosystem. Rather, interoperability envisions a system in which data could be shared and exchanged universally with other providers to assist in that individual’s care by providing a complete longitudinal record of care across providers, and enhance broader public health goals.  Healthcare data interoperability has been an ongoing and still not fully realized goal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Healthcare data interoperability** is the vision that a patient could access their own medical records (or the records of their dependents), and that a patient's care team (including doctors and nurses) could access those records across provider organizations. Interoperability envisions a system in which data could be shared and exchanged with other providers to assist in an individual’s care by providing a complete longitudinal record of care across providers, and enhance broader public health goals. Healthcare data interoperability has been an ongoing objective and is still not yet a fully realized goal.
```

> ## History 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## History of Regulation
```

The **Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC)** has been a critical driver of interoperability efforts. 

> ??? abstract "Click here to read more about Contributions of the ONC"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
??? abstract "Learn more about ONC"
```

    * The Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) was created under the George W. Bush Administration in 2004.  ONC is charged with synchronizing health IT in the U.S. health care sector.  
    Source: [www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=61429](www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=61429).
    * One of the first endeavors of ONC was the planning and design of a National Health Information Network (NHIN) to facilitate the exchange of electronic health information among providers and Health Information Exchange (HIE) entities. The continued vision is an interconnected healthcare ecosystem. 

> Efforts at interoperability were accelerated by the passing of the **Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Efforts at interoperability were accelerated by the passing of the **Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act**.
```

    * The reporting requirements for obtaining MU designation involved the ability of an EHR to perform such functions as generating problem lists, exchanging patient clinical data, or e-prescribing. 
    Source: [www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/index.html?redirect=/ehrincentiveprograms](www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/index.html?redirect=/ehrincentiveprograms).

The **Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA)** of 2015 also was pivotal in advancing interoperability.

??? abstract "Read more on MACRA here"
    MACRA also served as a vehicle for Congress to declare a goal of achieving widespread exchange of health information through interoperable certified EHR technology by December 31, 2018. MACRA stated that there should be “widespread interoperability” and established metrics to determine whether, and to what extent, objectives have been met by this time. 
    Source: [www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/2/text](www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/2/text).

> Finally, in December of 2016, Congress passed the **21st Century Cures Act**, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, in December of 2016, Congress passed the **21st Century Cures Act**, which will require EHR systems to provide Patient and Clinician access to patient data encoded with USCDI and implemented with HL7 FHIR and US Core. We'll talk about each of these topics in sequence.
```

        * Does not constitute information blocking as defined in section 3022(a). 
        * Source: [www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/34](www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/34)
    * Like MACRA, the 21st Century Cures Act mandated support for interoperable network exchange to be spearheaded by the ONC in collaboration with the National Institute of Standards and Technology and other divisions of HHS. 
    * This work included establishing and publishing details about a trusted exchange framework along with a directory of participating health information networks and rules for these networks to apply. 

## How Healthcare Data Standards Support Interoperability 
**It is often assumed that interoperability shortfalls are primarily due to the siloed nature of data within ecosystems. Although data blocking is a concern, most EHR vendors have met the minimum requirements for sharing information. However, evidence suggests that even though EHR vendors are meeting these minimum requirements, they are not facilitating the data exchanges to maximize the opportunities for interoperability.**

> Previous research has shown that the complexity of facilitating exchange, lack of standards, and costs were the primary roadblocks vendors offer when asked to expedite interoperability solutions.  To comply with the law, vendors would sometimes provide even the most basic information in PDF files, which are not easily interpreted by other EHRs, for transfer. Such transfers, while possibly meeting minimum compliance with patient needs, should also be viewed as an element of data blocking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previous research has shown that the complexity of facilitating exchange, lack of standards, and costs were the primary roadblocks vendors identified when asked to expedite interoperability solutions.  To comply with the law, vendors would sometimes provide only the most basic information in PDF files for transfer, which are not interpretable or computable by other EHRs. Such transfers, while possibly meeting minimum compliance according to the letter of the law, should also be viewed as an element of data blocking.
```

Source: [www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/reports/info_blocking_040915.pdf](www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/reports/info_blocking_040915.pdf)

!!! note "Enabling Interoperability"
    Therefore, to fully enable interoperability, significant work was required to create a uniform set of terminology standards and tools to facilitate the exchange of computable and interpretable health data. 

Ultimately, data sharing and interoperability will enable researchers to access billions of data points stored in EHRs to support their research, test the validity of findings, and/or strengthen analyses. 

> This interoperability framework is extremely complex. Individual patient models must define all workflows for clinical care, step by step. The care models must be mapped out for every instance and option for care. Each element of these models must be translated into specific clinical definitions all providers agree to accept. Then, those definitions are assigned machine-readable terminologies from known standards held in recognized libraries such as SNOMED CT, and assigned LOINC and RxNorm codes. When appropriate, those terminologies also needed to be bound to a value set from the U.S. National Library of Medicine. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This interoperability framework is extremely complex. Individual patient models must define all workflows for clinical care, step by step. The care models must be mapped out for every instance and option for care. Each element of these models must be translated into specific clinical definitions all providers agree to accept. Then, those definitions are assigned machine-readable terminologies from known standards held in recognized libraries such as SNOMED CT, or assigned LOINC and RxNorm codes. When appropriate, those terminologies also needed to be bound to a "value set" from the U.S. National Library of Medicine. 

A "value set" is a list of codes from one or more terminologies (e.g., SNOMED-CT and ICD-10) that can be used for some purpose. That purpose could be to represent the same topic, or could be used to enumerate a list of clinical options, or something else entirely.
```

Reviewer: Reference for value sets: https://vsac.nlm.nih.gov/welcome

Source: [https://bulletin.facs.org/2017/11/a-history-of-health-information-technology-and-the-future-of-interoperability/](https://bulletin.facs.org/2017/11/a-history-of-health-information-technology-and-the-future-of-interoperability/)

## Introduction to USCDI  
### Background and History  

> The resulting framework came to be known as the **United States Core Data for Interoperability (USCDI)**. USCDI is a standardized set of health data classes and constituent data elements for nationwide, interoperable health information exchange.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the United States, the current set of health data standards used to define interoperability are the **United States Core Data for Interoperability (USCDI)**. USCDI is a standardized set of health data classes and constituent data elements for nationwide, interoperable health information exchange.
```

It was adopted as a **standard in the ONC Cures Act Final Rule**. The USCDI sets a foundation for broader sharing of electronic health information to support patient care.

The new rules require EHR implementation of the USCDI and Health Level Seven’s (HL7®) **Fast Healthcare Information Resource (FHIR®)** to support seamless and secure access, exchange, and use of electronic health information.

Versions are updates to the USCDI standard.

> 

Reviewer: That sentence comes out of nowhere.

* Expand over time via predictable, transparent, and collaborative processes, weighing both anticipated benefits and industry-wide impacts. 

It should also be noted that USCDI also included **Levels** which denote the importance of certain data elements.

> The current USCDI levels are Comment (least important), 1, and 2 (most important). 
> Source: [https://www.particlehealth.com/blog/understanding-uscdi](https://www.particlehealth.com/blog/understanding-uscdi)

### Mapping USCDI to EHR data components  
USCDI includes the following high-level classes for defining data objects.

The classes’ specific healthcare data elements are listed in the Appendix A graphic.

>* Assessment and plan of treatment
>* Care Team members
>* Clinical Notes
>* Goals
>* Health concerns
>* Immunizations
>* Laboratory
* Medications
* Patient Demographics
* Problems
* Procedures
* Provenance
* Smoking Status
* Unique device identifier
* Vital signs

![USCDI Class Components](img/uscdi_classes.png)

Source:  [https://fhim.org/resources/page1](https://fhim.org/resources/page1)

!!! note "Example of how to read USCDI"
    Remember that “social-history” observation about smoking status that we saw earlier? 

>     Here it is in USCDI... [https://www.healthit.gov/isa/taxonomy/term/811/draft-uscdi-v3](https://www.healthit.gov/isa/taxonomy/term/811/draft-uscdi-v3)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Here Smoking Status is listed in the draft USCDI v3 [https://www.healthit.gov/isa/taxonomy/term/811/draft-uscdi-v3](https://www.healthit.gov/isa/taxonomy/term/811/draft-uscdi-v3)
    Here Smoking Status is listed in the current version of USCDI v2 [https://www.healthit.gov/isa/uscdi-data-class/smoking-status#uscdi-v2](https://www.healthit.gov/isa/uscdi-data-class/smoking-status#uscdi-v2)
    Here the specific terminology codes to be used to represent Smoking Status are enumerated [https://www.healthit.gov/isa/representing-patient-tobacco-use-smoking-status](https://www.healthit.gov/isa/representing-patient-tobacco-use-smoking-status)
```

??? question "Knowledge Check: What Data Class Is Smoking Under for USCDI Draft V3?"
    Health Status

??? question "Knowledge Check: Was this always true?"
    No! In previous versions of USCDI it was it’s own class.

> ## USCDI and FHIR®  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## USCDI and HL7 FHIR®  
```

We now want to better understand the connection between USCDI’s data standard and the FHIR® standard for data exchange.

!!! Note "Format and Structure"
    While USCDI defined **WHAT** data elements are required for a core definition of comprehensive interoperability, it did not specify the precise format and structure for that data exchange, or the **HOW**. 
    

> This would require the separate and complimentary adoption of the FHIR® standard explored further in the next part of this training exercise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Explaining the **HOW** of USCDI exchange requires the separate and complementary adoption of the FHIR® standard, explored further in Part 3 if this tutorial.
```

!!! check "For more information about USCDI:"
    Please check out these ONC Fact Sheets: 

    * [https://www.healthit.gov/topic/standards-technology/standards/fhir-fact-sheets](https://www.healthit.gov/topic/standards-technology/standards/fhir-fact-sheets)
    * [https://www.healthit.gov/cures/sites/default/files/cures/2020-03/USCDI.pdf](https://www.healthit.gov/cures/sites/default/files/cures/2020-03/USCDI.pdf)

!!! check "Key Point: Why this matters:"

>     **Supporting the effort to ensure meaningful interoperability of healthcare data, the USCDI standard was developed to consolidate the wide of array of data available in an EHR to a core set of data elements required for inclusion. This standard is effectively a universal baseline, one that any researcher accessing interoperable data should be able to count on to receive.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **The USCDI standard was developed to consolidate the wide of array of data available in an EHR down to a core set of data elements required for a minimal level of meaningful health data interoperability. This standard effectively sets a baseline, one that any patient, clinician, or researcher accessing interoperable health data should be able to count on to receive.**
```
